#################################################################
6. Featured GRACE and GRACE-FO Science and Applications   
#################################################################

6.1 2017 ESAS Decadal Survey Priorities 
==========================================
The National Research Council (NRC), led by the Space Studies Board in collaboration with other Earth Science related boards across the NRC, organized the 2017 Decadal Survey for Earth Science and Applications from Space (ESAS 2017), which aimed to generate consensus recommendations from the environmental monitoring and Earth science and applications community on an integrated and sustainable approach to the conduct of the U.S. government’s civilian space-based Earth-system science programs. These programs are carried out predominantly by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), and the United State Geological Survey (USGS), with supporting and complementary contributions from agencies including the National Science Foundation (NSF), Department of Agriculture (USDA), Department of Energy (DoE), and Department of Defense (DoD).  

ESAS 2017 presents a prioritized list of top-level science and application objectives to guide space-based Earth observations. From among hundreds suggested, ESAS 2017 addresses 35 key science and applications questions. Uses of GRACE and GRACE-FO data span all six categories that the 35 most important science and applications questions fall into: 

- Coupling of the Water and Energy Cycles
- Ecosystem Change
- Extending & Improving Weather and Air Quality Forecasts 
- Sea Level Rise
- Reducing Climate Uncertainty & Informing Societal Response
- Surface Dynamics, Geological Hazards and Disasters

Sections 6.2 through 6.10 illustrate key GRACE and GRACE-FO science and applications. Each of the featured advancements made in science and applications with GRACE and GRACE-FO data connects with one or more of the six priority categories the ESAS 2017 reports highlights. 

6.2 Groundwater  
==============================================

A key application of GRACE-FO data is in groundwater monitoring. As climate change continues to exacerbate drought conditions, reliance on groundwater for agricultural and other uses increases globally. Therefore, obtaining data that can track changes in groundwater levels plays a critical role in informing societal response to climate uncertainty and water scarcity, in particular in regions where groundwater supplies the bulk of the water required for irrigation.

For instance, Rodell et al. (2009) assess long-term groundwater storage variation in the Northwest India region using an extended record of GRACE time-variable gravity solutions as well as simulated soil-water variations from the Global Land Data Assimilation System. Their findings indicate that groundwater was being depleted at a mean rate of 17.7 ± 4.5 km3 per year over the Indian states of Rajasthan, Punjab and Haryana. During the study period of August 2002 to October 2008, groundwater depletion was equivalent to a net loss of 109 km3 of water, which is double the capacity of India’s largest surface-water reservoir.

Another example of the use of GRACE data for groundwater monitoring arises in a study conducted by Iqbal et al. (2016) over Pakistan. Like other agrarian countries, Pakistan is heavily dependent on its groundwater resources to meet the irrigated agricultural water demand. Iqbal et al. (2016) evaluate the potential of GRACE TWS data of changes in groundwater storage as a cost-effective approach for groundwater monitoring and sustainable water management in the Indus basin. The GRACE data from 2003 to 2010 were analyzed as total water storage variations. The VIC (variable infiltration capacity) hydrological model-generated soil moisture and surface runoff were used for the separation of TWS into groundwater storage anomalies. The GRACE-based groundwater storage anomalies are found to agree with trends inferred from in-situ ground data. A general depletion trend is observed in Upper Indus Plain where groundwater is declining at a mean rate of about 13.5 mm per year in equivalent height of water during 2003–2010. A total loss of about 11.82 km3 per year fresh groundwater stock is inferred for Upper Indus Plain. Based on total water storage variations and ground knowledge, the two southern river plains, Bari and Rechna are found to be under threat of extensive groundwater depletion. Iqbal et al. (2016) find that the GRACE-based estimation of groundwater storage changes is skillful enough to provide monthly updates on the trend of the groundwater storage changes for resource managers and policy makers of Indus basin. 

6.3 Flood Potential 
==============================================
Another application of TWS anomalies is in assessing flood potential (Reager et al. 2014). TWS anomalies indicate the total change in water content of a watershed. If a watershed already stores more water than “normal”, this increases the likelihood of a precipitation event leading to a flood. GRACE and GRACE-FO help show how total water storage impacts the predisposition of a region to flooding, which can ultimately result in longer lead times in flood warnings. For example, Reager et al. (2014) use a case study of the catastrophic 2011 Missouri River floods to establish a relationship between river discharge, as measured by gauge stations, and basin-wide water storage, as measured remotely by GRACE. They show that the inclusion of GRACE-based total water storage information allows us to assess the predisposition of a river basin to flooding as much as 5–11 months in advance. 

6.4 Drought Monitoring
============================================== 
As part of an effort to create a more comprehensive and objective identiﬁcation of drought conditions in North America, GRACE-based drought indicators were developed. This involved integrating spatially, temporally, and vertically disaggregated GRACE terrestrial water storage (TWS) data into the U.S. and North American Drought Monitors (Houborg et al., 2012). TWS comprises the sum of the five major components of the terrestrial hydrologic cycle: groundwater, soil moisture, surface waters, snow and ice. Previously, the drought monitors lacked objective information on deep soil moisture and groundwater conditions, which are useful indicators of drought. Extensive data sets of groundwater storage from U.S. Geological Survey monitoring wells and soil moisture from the Soil Climate Analysis Network were used to assess improvements in the hydrological modeling skill resulting from the assimilation of GRACE TWS data. The results point toward modest, but statistically signiﬁcant, improvements in the hydrological modeling skill across major parts of the United States, highlighting the potential value of a GRACE-assimilated water storage ﬁeld for improving drought detection. GRACE assimilation has also been demonstrated to increase correlation between TWS estimates and gauged river flow, indicating that data assimilation has considerable potential to downscale GRACE TWS data for hydrological applications (Zaitchik et al., 2008). 

6.5 Ice Mass Change 
==============================================
GRACE plays a critical role in measuring total long-term ice mass variations. Velicogna et al. (2006) determined mass variations of the Antarctic ice sheet from 2002–2005, and found that the mass of the ice sheet decreased significantly, at a rate of 152 ± 80 cubic kilometers of ice per year, which is equivalent to 0.4 ± 0.2 millimeters of global sea level rise per year. Most of this mass loss came from the West Antarctic Ice Sheet. Velicogna et al. (2014) use GRACE to determine the regional acceleration in ice mass loss in Greenland and Antarctica for 2003–2013 and find that the total mass loss is controlled by only a few regions. In Greenland, the southeast and northwest generate 70% of the loss (280±58 Gt/yr) mostly from ice dynamics, the southwest accounts for 54% of the total in loss (25.4±1.2 Gt/yr) from a decrease in surface mass balance, followed by the northwest (34%), with no significant acceleration in the northeast. In Antarctica, the Amundsen Sea sector and the Antarctic Peninsula account for 64% and 17%, respectively, of the total loss (180±10 Gt/yr), which Velicogna et al. (2014) attribute mainly to ice dynamics.

6.6 Global and Regional Sea Level-Budget
==============================================
The causes and implications of long-term global sea-Level-rise have been well established in scientific literature (IPCC Climate Change 2013). Sea-Level-rise is caused by a combination of freshwater increase due to the melting of land ice and “thermal expansion”, which arises due to warming ocean temperatures. Since 2003, ocean temperature data for depths above 2,000 m have become available on a regular basis with the advent of the Argo array of profiling floats. Measurements from ships provide observations from earlier periods but are mostly limited to depths above 700 m. The ocean layers above 700 m and 2,000 m represent only 20% and 50%, respectively, of the total ocean volume Llovel et al. (2015).  
Combining observations of sea level from altimeters with GRACE observations of ocean mass change provides a new constraint on the rate of thermal expansion in the global ocean, and hence on ocean heat content change, which enable a more complete estimation of the global sea Level-budget. For instance, Llovel et al. (2015) found that the deep-ocean (below 2000m) for the 2005-2013 period had not shown large warming and thus sea Level-trends, but the uncertainties (−0.13 ± 0.72 mm yr−1 to global sea-Level-rise and −0.08 ± 0.43 W m−2 to Earth’s energy balance) are fairly large due to trend uncertainties in geocenter and GIA estimates, in particular. However, a similar sea Level-budget approach (altimetry minus GRACE and upper ocean steric signals) on a more regional Level-in the South Pacific revealed a clear deep (below 2000m) ocean warming signal (Volkov et al., 2016).

6.7 Global Water Cycle Effects on Sea Level
==============================================
GRACE data has also been used to understand how the internal variability of the global water cycle contributes to sea level variations. Hamlington et al. (2017) quantify the contribution of TWS variability to sea level variability on decadal timescales. They find that decadal sea level variability centered in the Pacific Ocean is closely tied to low frequency variability of TWS in key areas across the globe.
Reager et al. (2016) combine GRACE data with estimates of mass loss by glaciers to estimate groundwater's impact on sea-level change. Results showed that between 2002 and 2014, climate-driven variability in precipitation resulted in an additional 3200 ± 900 gigatons of water being stored on land, which caused net groundwater storage to increase. This gain slowed the rate of sea level rise by 0.71 ± 0.20 millimeters per year. 
Although the rise of the global ocean has been remarkably steady for most of this time, between early 2010 and summer 2011, global sea level fell sharply, by about half a centimeter. Using data from GRACE, Boening et al. (2012) showed that the drop was caused by the very strong La Niña that began in late 2010. This periodic Pacific Ocean climate phenomenon changed rainfall patterns all over our planet, temporarily moving large amounts of water from the ocean to the continents, primarily to Australia (see Fasullo et al., 2013), northern South America and Southeast Asia. The 2011 dip did not last for very long: by mid-2012, global mean sea level not only recovered from the 5 mm it dropped in 2010-11, it resumed its long-term mean annual rise of 3.2 mm per year.  

6.8 Glacial Isostatic Adjustment
==============================================
The measurement of glacial isostatic adjustment (GIA) is one of the key ways in which scientists can study the Earth’s mantle, ice history, global and regional sea level histories, tide-gauge data and space terrestrial geodetic measurements. When coupled with other space and terrestrial geodetic measurements, such as GPS networks and with multi-decade terrestrial gravity data, GRACE data provide new constraints on GIA and illuminate new interpretations of ice-sheet history and mantle response. 

6.9 Earthquakes
==============================================
GRACE and GRACE-FO data enable the observation of coseismic and postseismic gravitational changes that occur due to earthquakes with magnitude larger than about 7.5 on the Richter scale. Even at this magnitude, however, the spatial resolution of GRACE and GRACE-FO limits the direct resolution of the full signature of earthquakes (Sun and Okubo 2004; De Linage et al., 2009). The 2004 Sumatra–Andaman earthquake is one of the biggest earthquakes ever recorded, with estimates of its magnitude ranging between 9.1 and 9.3. GRACE detected the coseismic and postseismic gravity signature of the earthquake. However, the postseismic signature has a spectral content closer to the GRACE bandwidth than the coseismic signature. De Linage et al. (2009) observe a multi-year postseismic relaxation consisting of a large-scale positive gravity anomaly extending over 15° of latitude along the subduction area. Information on the postseismic relaxation is valuable in order to quantify the bulk properties of the Earth’s crust and upper mantle.

6.10 Weather Forecasts
============================================== 
In recent years atmospheric sounding by space-based GPS radio occultation has emerged as a powerful and relatively inexpensive approach for sounding the global atmosphere with high precision, accuracy, and vertical resolution in all weather and over both land and ocean. GPS occultation is considered a valuable data source for numerical weather prediction and climate change studies. GRACE has been used to produce this data with the radio occultation technique, which makes use of the radio signals transmitted by dedicated GPS receivers onboard GRACE. GRACE-FO continues the radio occultation measurements of atmospheric temperature and humidity profiles for use by weather service agencies.
