#################################################################
Instrument Design
#################################################################

The instruments on GRACE and GRACE-FO were designed to enable measurements of the mean and time-variable components of the Earth’s gravity field variations. They can detect gravitational differences on the planet's surface equivalent to that of a 300-km disk of water only one centimeter thick. GRACE-FO uses the same method to measure gravitational fields as the GRACE mission. Unique to the GRACE missions, the two satellites are the measurement instrument. GRACE-FO’s two satellites follow each other in orbit around the Earth, separated by about 137 miles (220 km). Small changes in the distance between the two satellites, which result from the variable pull of gravity on each as they pass over the Earth’s surface, make up the measurement. Both satellites are capable of flying either in the lead or trailing positions, forward or backward into the residual atmospheric wind. The mass of each GRACE-FO satellite is approximately 600 kg, including about 30 kg of nitrogen fuel propellant used for orbit control maneuvers.

A microwave ranging system measures the variations of the separation distance of the satellites to within one micron, about the diameter of a blood cell. The instrument is a K-Band Ranging System and it precisely measures the changes in the separation between the two GRACE satellites using phase tracking of K- and Ka-band microwave signals sent between the two satellites in a configuration known as DOWR (Dual One Way Ranging). Each satellite transmits carrier phase to the other at two frequencies, allowing for ionospheric corrections. K-band has a radio frequency of about 24 GHz and Ka-band is near 32 GHz. The range variations can be reconstructed from these phase measurements and its numerically derived derivatives, along with other mission and ancillary data, is subsequently analyzed to compute the parameters of an Earth gravity field model that reflects the planetary mass distribution for a particular month.  
Spatial and temporal variations in the Earth’s gravity field affect the twin spacecraft differently, causing changes in the distance between the spacecraft as they orbit the Earth. For instance, when the GRACE-FO satellite pair pass over an area of the Earth with a positive gravitational anomaly, the change in gravitational field affects the lead satellite first, pulling it away from the trailing satellite. As the satellites continue, the trailing satellite is pulled toward the lead satellite as it passes over the gravity anomaly. 
The microwave ranging instrument used by GRACE and GRACE-FO is referenced to a ultrastable quartz clock and coupled with precise Satellite Global Positioning System (GPS) receivers, which determine the position of the satellite over the Earth to within a centimeter or less. 
A highly accurate electrostatic, temperature-controlled accelerometer, which is located at each satellite’s center of mass, measures the non-gravitational accelerations of the satellites, which include air drag, solar radiation pressure, and attitude control activator operation. Measuring the non-gravitational forces on each satellite in this way serves to ensure that only accelerations caused by gravity are considered in the distance measurements. The Star Camera Assembly is comprised of star cameras (three on GRACE-FO, two on GRACE) mounted close to the accelerometer on each satellite to provide the precise attitude references for the satellites.
In addition to the microwave ranging system (which is based on the corollary instrument on GRACE), GRACE-FO also has an experimental laser ranging instrument, which is designed to make the measurement of the separation distance between the two spacecraft (the primary measurement) even more precise. This advanced laser instrument could improve the accuracy of inter-spacecraft ranging by tenfold or more and lead to significantly enhanced gravity measurements and future missions.
